feat(docker): Support for Bearer token to access the Docker registry (#10400)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/docker.md

};
```

#### Google Container Registry

Assume you are running GitLab CI in the Google Cloud and are storing the Docker images in the Google Container Registry (GCR).
Access to the GCR uses a Bearer token based authentication.
The token for the build can be obtained by running `gcloud auth print-access-token`, which requires the Google Cloud SDK to be installed.

It is also very important to note that this is a short-lived token ([60 minutes](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/50370714/google-cloud-bearer-token-expiry)) and thus storing it repeated builds is useless.

When applying this to Renovate this all means the access token must be injected into the `hostRules` configuration just before Renovate is started.

_This documentation only gives **a few hints** on **a possible way** to achieve this in this scenario_

To get access to the token a custom Renovate Docker image is needed that includes the Google Cloud SDK.
The Dockerfile can look like this:

```Dockerfile

> FROM renovate/renovate:25.40.1

Reviewer: Note: we need to add this to our docs renovate upgrade. So this version gets updated regularly.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I thought it would get picked up automatically???

Reviewer: Not sure, maybe yes. We should check it after merge.

Reviewer 2: I think it matches all `*.md` files, at least if I'm reading `matchPaths` correct?

```json
    {
      "description": "Update references to Docker tags for renovate/renovate in Markdown files weekly",
      "matchPackageNames": ["renovate/renovate"],
      "matchPaths": [".md"],
      "extends": ["schedule:weekly"],
      "automerge": true,
      "stabilityDays": 0,
      "commitMessageTopic": "references to {{{depName}}}",
      "semanticCommitType": "docs",
      "semanticCommitScope": null,
      "additionalBranchPrefix": "docs-"
    },
```

https://github.com/renovatebot/.github/blob/930726ea9db00b581216bc7618a832dfcd81155a/default.json#L44-L55

Reviewer: Sure, does the regex manager match too?

Reviewer 2: ```json
  "regexManagers": [
    {
      "description": "Update Renovate references in Markdown files",
      "fileMatch": ["\\.md$"],
      "matchStrings": [
        "(?<depName>renovate\\/renovate):(?<currentValue>[a-z0-9.-]+)(?:@(?<currentDigest>sha256:[a-f0-9]+))?"
      ],
      "datasourceTemplate": "docker",
      "versioningTemplate": "docker"
    },
```

https://github.com/renovatebot/.github/blob/930726ea9db00b581216bc7618a832dfcd81155a/default.json#L96-L105

Reviewer: Ok, should work as is. 👍

Author: Ok, so I'll leave this as-is.

};
```

#### Google Container Registry

Assume you are running GitLab CI in the Google Cloud, and you are storing your Docker images in the Google Container Registry (GCR).

> Access to the GCR uses a Bearer token based authentication. This token can be obtained by running `gcloud auth print-access-token`, which requires the Google Cloud SDK to be installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Access to the GCR uses Bearer token based authentication.
This token can be obtained by running `gcloud auth print-access-token`, which requires the Google Cloud SDK to be installed.
```

> It is also very important to note that this is a short-lived token ([60 minutes](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/50370714/google-cloud-bearer-token-expiry)) and thus storing it for subsequent builds in a variable (like you can do with the `RENOVATE_TOKEN`) is not an option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Storing the bearer token for subsequent builds in a variable (like you can do with the `RENOVATE_TOKEN`) is not an option because the token expires after 60 minutes.
```

I don't think we need the Stack Overflow page, if that only has the information that the token expires in 60 minutes. I'd rather we link to the official Google Cloud SDK docs, but their docs on `gcloud auth print-access-token` doesn't mention a timeout/expiry at all...

Docs I found:

- https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/application-default/print-access-token
- https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/print-access-token

Author: Yes, I also could not find any official Google documentation. I do know these things expire quite quickly.

When running Renovate in this context the Google access token must be retrieved and injected into the `hostRules` configuration just before Renovate is started.

_This documentation gives **a few hints** on **a possible way** to achieve this end result._

> The basic approach documented here is that you create a custom image and then run Renovate as one of the stages of your project. To make this run independent of any user you should use a `Project Access Token` for the project and use this as the `RENOVATE_TOKEN` variable for Gitlab CI. See also: https://gitlab.com/renovate-bot/renovate-runner

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic approach documented here is that you create a custom image and then run Renovate as one of the stages of your project.
To make this run independent of any user you should use a `Project Access Token` for the project and use this as the `RENOVATE_TOKEN` variable for Gitlab CI.
See also the [renovate-runner repository on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/renovate-bot/renovate-runner).
```

Use one sentence per line, and use a nice Markdown style link which explains where clicking on the link will take you.

};
```

#### Google Container Registry

Assume you are running GitLab CI in the Google Cloud, and you are storing your Docker images in the Google Container Registry (GCR).

Access to the GCR uses Bearer token based authentication.
This token can be obtained by running `gcloud auth print-access-token`, which requires the Google Cloud SDK to be installed.

Storing the bearer token for subsequent builds in a variable (like you can do with the `RENOVATE_TOKEN`) is not an option because the token expires after 60 minutes.

When running Renovate in this context the Google access token must be retrieved and injected into the `hostRules` configuration just before Renovate is started.

_This documentation gives **a few hints** on **a possible way** to achieve this end result._

The basic approach documented here is that you create a custom image and then run Renovate as one of the stages of your project.

> To make this run independent of any user you should use a `Project Access Token` for the project and use this as the `RENOVATE_TOKEN` variable for Gitlab CI.

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/240096/122213845-b10ac500-cea9-11eb-8bbe-c7ed18e06fdd.png)

> To make this run independent of any user you should use a `Project Access Token` for the project and use this as the `RENOVATE_TOKEN` variable for Gitlab CI.

Reviewer 2: Thank you! Just checking. 😄

> To make this run independent of any user you should use a `Project Access Token` for the project and use this as the `RENOVATE_TOKEN` variable for Gitlab CI.

Author: Do note that GitLab also has Personal Access Tokens! It has both.
I think that it is better to tie something like this to the project instead of the person who happens to be in the team.

> To make this run independent of any user you should use a `Project Access Token` for the project and use this as the `RENOVATE_TOKEN` variable for Gitlab CI.

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/240096/122220778-f383d000-ceb0-11eb-95c9-8a3f9c954ae7.png)

See also the [renovate-runner repository on GitLab](https://gitlab.com/renovate-bot/renovate-runner).

To get access to the token a custom Renovate Docker image is needed that includes the Google Cloud SDK.
The Dockerfile to create such an image can look like this:

```Dockerfile
FROM renovate/renovate:25.40.1
# Include the "Docker tip" which you can find here https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install
# under "Installation" for "Debian/Ubuntu"
RUN ...
```

> One way to provide this token using the `hostRules` to Renovate is by generating a `config.js` file from within the `.gitlab-ci.yml`:

Author: I have tried to improve these two parts of the documentation. Please let me know what you think of this.

};
```

#### Google Container Registry

> Assume you are running Google cloud a personal Gitlab CI and storing the Docker images in the Google Container Registry (GCR).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume you are running Google Cloud a personal GitLab CI and storing the Docker images in the Google Container Registry (GCR).
```

In this scenario the GCR requires token based authentication for everything and thus you must make two additional things happen:

> 1. Get access to your token
> 2. Make sure renovate gets the token to read the docker registry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Get access to your token
1. Make sure Renovate gets the token to read the Docker registry.
```

Let the Markdown renderer worry about how to order the list. 😄

_This documentation only gives **a few hints** on **a possible way** to achieve this in this scenario_

> You need a renovate docker image that includes the google cloud SDK which you have to build yourself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need a Renovate Docker image that includes the Google Cloud SDK which you have to build yourself.
```

> A rough sketch of what the Dockerfile to build such a custom renovate image can look like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A rough sketch of what the Dockerfile to build such a custom Renovate image can look like.
```

```Dockerfile

> FROM renovate/renovate:12.34.56

Author: Ok, I thought a "clearly fake version" would be good.

# Include the "Docker tip" which you can find here https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install
# under "Installation" for "Debian/Ubuntu"
RUN ...
```

In the `renovate.json` you can instruct Renovate to use a secret as the token to use when connecting the specified docker registry:

```js
{
  "hostRules": [
    {
      "matchHost": "eu.gcr.io",
      "token": "{{ secrets.GOOGLE_ACCESS_TOKEN }}"
    }
  ]
}
```

> You do not want to persist this token anywhere.

Author: In this case the token is short lived: 1 hour.
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/50370714/google-cloud-bearer-token-expiry
So the "where" does not matter. You do not want to store it. So you must retrieve the new token on every run. 
This is not a Docker issue; it is a generic thing when using the Google cloud.

> You do not want to persist this token anywhere.

Author: I have updated  the documentation to clarify.

> One way to provide this token to Renovate is by creating a temporary file with the token from within the .gitlab-ci.yml using something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One way to provide this token to Renovate is by creating a temporary file with the token from within the `.gitlab-ci.yml` using something like this:
```

```yaml
script:
  - 'echo "module.exports = { secrets: { GOOGLE_ACCESS_TOKEN: ''"$(gcloud auth print-access-token)"'' } };" > config.js'

>   - renovate $RENOVATE_EXTRA_FLAGS

Reviewer 2: I assume this code prints the token as plaintext into the `config.js` file? Don't you "leak" the token into each Docker container you start up this way?

Author: Inside the docker container is always has access to the token by running `gcloud auth print-access-token`.
The problem I'm still having is actually getting Renovate to use this token.
Current assessment is two fold: 
- I do not understand how the secrets is meant to be used.
- Renovate did not expect the need to have shortlived token.

So this part of the documentation will change before I take of the "Draft" label because this simply does not work.

};
```

#### Google Container Registry

Assume you are running Google cloud a personal Gitlab CI and storing the Docker images in the Google Container Registry (GCR).
In this scenario the GCR requires token based authentication for everything and thus you must make two additional things happen:

1. Get access to your token
2. Make sure renovate gets the token to read the docker registry.

_This documentation only gives **a few hints** on **a possible way** to achieve this in this scenario_

You need a renovate docker image that includes the google cloud SDK which you have to build yourself.
A rough sketch of what the Dockerfile to build such a custom renovate image can look like.

```Dockerfile
FROM renovate/renovate:12.34.56
# Include the "Docker tip" which you can find here https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install
# under "Installation" for "Debian/Ubuntu"
RUN ...
```

In the `renovate.json` you can instruct Renovate to use a secret as the token to use when connecting the specified docker registry:

```js
{
  "hostRules": [
    {
      "matchHost": "eu.gcr.io",
      "token": "{{ secrets.GOOGLE_ACCESS_TOKEN }}",

>       "authType": "Bearer"

Reviewer: This should be optional. The pr code already has the default. So remove this, it would cause confusion with other renovate token auth, which also default to bearer.
```suggestion
```

Author: Yes, it is optional. The tests I created show that.
